OSDOCS#2429: documenting how updates work (#60091)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/update-evaluate-availability.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="update-evaluate-availability_{context}"]
= Evaluating update availability

> The Cluster Version Operator (CVO) periodically queries the OpenShift Update Service for the most recent graph of update possibilities.

Reviewer: nit: there are multiple update services, including Red Hat's hosted https://api.openshift.com/api/upgrades_info/graph and customer OpenShift Update Service deploys.  Can we say "an OpenShift Update Service" instead  of "the OpenShift Update Service" here?

Reviewer: Also, Scott has been pushing for, and it makes sense to me, avoiding the word "graph" as far as possible.  The graph aspects of this are an internal implementation detail, and the relevant aspect for a cluster admin is that the update service provides information about update recommendations and risks that are specific to their cluster.

This graph is based on the channel to which the cluster is subscribed.

> If the graph contains paths to OCP versions that are newer than the cluster's current version, the CVO saves these versions into either the `availableUpdates` or `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

Reviewer: nit: there are a few "OCP version(s)" references.  Should they be `{product-title} versions`?  Or `OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) version` the first time and `OCP version` afterwards?  Or something?  I expect most readers will be able to unpack OCP, but it still makes me a bit jittery to open with a collapsed acronym ;).

Reviewer: "newer than the cluster's current version" isn't quite right.  For example:

```console
openshift/cincinnati-graph-data $ hack/show-edges.py --cincinnati https://api.openshift.com/api/upgrades_info/graph fast-4.13 | grep '^4[.]12[.]0 -\|4[.]13[.]1'
4.12.0 -(blocked: ConsoleAvailableUpdatesNull)-> 4.12.1
4.12.0 -(blocked: ConsoleAvailableUpdatesNull)-> 4.12.1
4.12.0 -> 4.12.10
4.12.0 -> 4.12.11
4.12.0 -(blocked: PatchesOlderRelease)-> 4.12.12
4.12.0 -> 4.12.13
4.12.0 -> 4.12.14
4.12.0 -> 4.12.15
4.12.0 -> 4.12.16
4.12.0 -> 4.12.17
4.12.0 -> 4.12.18
4.12.0 -> 4.12.19
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.2
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.3
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.4
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.5
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.6
4.12.0 -(blocked: LeakedMachineConfigBlocksMCO)-> 4.12.7
4.12.0 -> 4.12.8
4.12.0 -> 4.12.9
4.12.16 -> 4.13.1
4.12.17 -> 4.13.1
4.12.18 -> 4.13.1
4.12.19 -> 4.13.1
4.13.0 -> 4.13.1
```

Folks currently on 4.12.0 and in channel `fast-4.13` have 4.13.1 as a "newer than" release (both in terms of build date and [SemVer ordering][1].  But because of [some 4.12.z changes we want folks to pick up before they head to 4.13][2], there are no direct update recommendations from 4.12.0 straight to 4.13.1.  Instead, we recommend chains like 4.12.0 -> 4.12.19 -> 4.13.1.

If we instead [pivot to talking about update recommendations][3], we can skip right to populating `availableUpdates` and `conditionalUpdates`, without having to invent wording to bridge between "graph paths" and those update recommendations.

[1]: https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html#spec-item-11
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/cincinnati-graph-data/blame/00c9be09fff5339fc26493dd88a921c2df282334/build-suggestions/4.13.yaml#L2
[3]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60091#discussion_r1212343513

Author: That's a good catch, the first mention of OCP on this page should be written out.

Author: Here's my suggested rewrite to resolve both this comment about "newer than" releases and limiting the mention of "graphs" per your comment below this one:

> The Cluster Version Operator (CVO) periodically queries an OpenShift Update Service for the most recent data about update possibilities. This data is based on the channel to which the cluster is subscribed. The CVO saves update recommendations and risks into either the availableUpdates or conditionalUpdates field of its ClusterVersion resource.

Most risks are limited to clusters with specific characteristics, such as clusters with a certain size or clusters that are deployed in a particular cloud platform.

The CVO continuously evaluates its cluster characteristics against the conditional risk information for each conditional update, and if it finds that the cluster matches the criteria, it stores this information in the `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.
If the CVO finds that the cluster doesn't match the risks of an update, or that there are no risks associated with the update, it stores the target version in the `availableUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.
The user interface (web console and CLI) then presents this information to the administrator.
Each "supported but not recommended" update recommendation contains a link to further resources about the risk so that the administrator can make an informed decision about the update.

You can inspect all available updates with the following command:

[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc adm upgrade --include-not-recommended

Reviewer: nit: I agree with @petr-muller 's [descriptive vs. instructive distinction][1].  But in dipping into instruction here, can we either add some wiggle room like "One way to inspect ...", or just skip the instructive detail?  As it stands, it feels a bit weird to me to cover the `oc` interface without also covering the web-console interface.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60091#discussion_r1204006628

Author: I'll loosen up the wording to indicate that this is just one way to do it.

[source,terminal]
----
Cluster version is 4.10.22

Upstream is unset, so the cluster will use an appropriate default.
Channel: fast-4.11 (available channels: candidate-4.10, candidate-4.11, eus-4.10, fast-4.10, fast-4.11, stable-4.10)

Recommended updates:

  VERSION     IMAGE
  4.10.26     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:e1fa1f513068082d97d78be643c369398b0e6820afab708d26acda2262940954
  4.10.25     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:ed84fb3fbe026b3bbb4a2637ddd874452ac49c6ead1e15675f257e28664879cc
  4.10.24     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:aab51636460b5a9757b736a29bc92ada6e6e6282e46b06e6fd483063d590d62a
  4.10.23     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:e40e49d722cb36a95fa1c03002942b967ccbd7d68de10e003f0baa69abad457b

Supported but not recommended updates:

  Version: 4.11.0
  Image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:300bce8246cf880e792e106607925de0a404484637627edf5f517375517d54a4
  Recommended: False
  Reason: RPMOSTreeTimeout
  Message: Nodes with substantial numbers of containers and CPU contention may not reconcile machine configuration https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2111817#c22
----

> You can inspect the underlying availability data created by the CVO by querying the `ClusterVersion` resource:

Author: I worked with Petr to modify the lines below this comment in light of @shellyyang1989 and @evakhoni's feedback. Let me know if there are any issues with this particular approach

Reviewer: I like the existing mentions of `availableUpdates` and `conditionalUpdates` in the preceding text.  And I'm [on the fence][1] about whether `oc  adm upgrade ...` examples are overly-instructive-sided distractions from the generic descriptions.  But I don't understand why we'd drop down to talking through specific `oc get clusterversion ...` incantations.  We've already given enough detail for admins who are interested in interacting with ClusterVersion to be able to find it and the relevant `status` properties.  We have customer-facing UIs like `oc adm upgrade ...` and the web-console to pretty-print that `status` information for customers.  It seems like you'd have to be really API-focused to care about the `oc get clusterversion ...` detail, and we have [existing API docs][2] for folks who are that interested.  It feels like a distraction for the folks who are not API-focused, as they skim through here wondering if we are going to drop another descriptive or conceptual nugget (which we don't do, but readers won't know that without skimming or us dropping this portion of the text).

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60091#discussion_r1212354660
[2]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.13/rest_api/config_apis/clusterversion-config-openshift-io-v1.html#status

Reviewer 2: I meant these to serve as an examples that help going from abstract to concrete (you read a descriptive text and then you can look how what we described looks like when you peek under the hood), but I agree the doc will work even without them.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="update-evaluate-availability_{context}"]

> = Evaluating update availability

Author: That's a good point about the gerund, I'll go with "Evaluation of update availability" if that's okay with you.

The Cluster Version Operator (CVO) periodically queries the OpenShift Update Service (OSUS) for the most recent data about update possibilities.

> This data is based on the channel to which the cluster is subscribed.

Author: I think that suggestion would break the technical accuracy of the statement. The CVO still gathers data from OSUS, but IIRC the specific data that is requested is based on the subscribed channel of the cluster. I think a sentence like this would remove the formality while still being accurate:

`This data is based on the cluster's subscribed channel`

The CVO then saves information about update recommendations and risks into either the `availableUpdates` or `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

The CVO periodically checks the conditional updates for update risks.
These risks are conveyed through the data served by the OpenShift Update Service, which contains information for each version about known issues that may affect a cluster updated to that version.
Most risks are limited to clusters with specific characteristics, such as clusters with a certain size or clusters that are deployed in a particular cloud platform.

The CVO continuously evaluates its cluster characteristics against the conditional risk information for each conditional update, and if it finds that the cluster matches the criteria, it stores this information in the `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

> If the CVO finds that the cluster doesn't match the risks of an update, or that there are no risks associated with the update, it stores the target version in the `availableUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

Reviewer 3: s/doesn't/does not

The user interface, either the web console or the OpenShift CLI (`oc`), then presents this information to the administrator.

> Each "supported but not recommended" update recommendation contains a link to further resources about the risk so that the administrator can make an informed decision about the update.

Reviewer 3: > "supported but not recommended"

Do we use quotes like this in the docs? Should it be italics or bold?

> Each "supported but not recommended" update recommendation contains a link to further resources about the risk so that the administrator can make an informed decision about the update.

Author: @dfitzmau I suppose it can go either way and work fine, I think there are a few instances of "you" in this doc that relate to specific commands a user could use.

However, this page is all purely conceptual info (with exceptions for commands users could use to find real examples of conceptual stuff being explained), and the IBM style guide does seem to permit the use of [Third person](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-verbs#third-person) when describing "concepts, facts, and results." I'm personally inclined to keep the focus on the concept and not the user here, but let me know if you disagree.

> Each "supported but not recommended" update recommendation contains a link to further resources about the risk so that the administrator can make an informed decision about the update.

Author: @mburke5678 I don't think this is an appropriate use for quotes now that I think about it. IIRC, I think it was an attempt by QE and/or devs to highlight that this is approximate wording in our CLI output and web UI, but without explicitly stating this as the exact wording (in case it changes down the line).

I think I'll take the risk of maintenance down the line and use bold formatting, since quotes are probably not acceptable here

You can inspect all available updates with the following command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc adm upgrade --include-not-recommended
----

> The additional `--include-not-recommended` parameter includes updates that are available but not recommended due to a known risk that applies to the cluster.

Author: I'm not sure I understand this, sorry. 

TLDR: "known risk" refers to an issue for a specific update, not a general issue for all OCP clusters that prevents valid updates from showing up as available.

At any point, there may be a number of OCP updates that are still supported by Red Hat, but are not explicitly recommended because they can have a certain issue that _might_ cause problems for clusters with a specific characteristic. 

For instance, the one "supported but not recommended" update in the example below has the following known risk: "Nodes with substantial numbers of containers and CPU contention may not reconcile machine configuration". Because of this risk, users can only see this available update when they use the `--include-not-recommended` parameter and thus signal that they are willing to consider potentially problematic updates.

  4.10.23     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:e40e49d722cb36a95fa1c03002942b967ccbd7d68de10e003f0baa69abad457b

Supported but not recommended updates:

  Version: 4.11.0
  Image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:300bce8246cf880e792e106607925de0a404484637627edf5f517375517d54a4
  Recommended: False
  Reason: RPMOSTreeTimeout
  Message: Nodes with substantial numbers of containers and CPU contention may not reconcile machine configuration https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2111817#c22
----

One way to inspect the underlying availability data created by the CVO is by querying the `ClusterVersion` resource with the following command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get clusterversion version -o json | jq '.status.availableUpdates'
----

.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
[
  {
    "channels": [
      "candidate-4.11",
      "candidate-4.12",
      "fast-4.11",
      "fast-4.12"
    ],
    "image": "quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:400267c7f4e61c6bfa0a59571467e8bd85c9188e442cbd820cc8263809be3775",
    "url": "https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2023:3213",
    "version": "4.11.41"
  },
  ...
]
----

> The same command can be used to check conditional updates:

Reviewer 3: Is is _really_ the same command if one of the flags is different? 

```suggestion
You can use the same command to check conditional updates, as shown in the following example:
```

Reviewer 4: yeah not exactly the same since we're accessing different json path with jq. perhaps s/the same/a similar

Author: Sounds good, I can use the following wording: "A similar command can be used..."

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="update-evaluate-availability_{context}"]
= Evaluating update availability

The Cluster Version Operator (CVO) periodically queries the OpenShift Update Service for the most recent graph of update possibilities.
This graph is based on the channel to which the cluster is subscribed.

> If the graph contains paths to OCP versions that are newer than the cluster's current version, the CVO saves these versions into the `available updates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

Reviewer 5: > `available updates`

It's `availableUpdates` in the ClusterVersion.

> the CVO saves these versions into the `available updates` field

If the graph contains paths to OCP versions that are newer than the cluster's current version, the CVO saves these versions into either the `availableUpdates` field or the `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

> The CVO continuously tests the available updates for conditional update risks.

Reviewer 5: > The CVO continuously tests the available updates for conditional update risks.

Conditional updates contains update risks to the version.

Reviewer 5: Sounds good to me :)

These risks are conveyed through the data served by the OpenShift Update Service, which contains information for each version about known issues that may affect a cluster updated to that version.
Most risks are limited to clusters with specific characteristics, such as clusters with a certain size or clusters that are deployed in a particular cloud platform.

> The CVO checks its cluster characteristics against the conditional risk information for each available update, and if it finds that the cluster matches the criteria, it also stores this information in its ClusterVersion resource.

Reviewer 5: > The CVO checks its cluster characteristics against the conditional risk information for each available update,

The CVO continuously evaluates its cluster characteristics against the conditional risk information for each conditional update, and if it finds that the cluster matches the criteria, it stores the target version and the risk information in the `conditionalUpdates` field of its ClusterVersion resource.

> The user interface (web console and CLI) then presents this information to the administrator.

Reviewer 5: > The user interface (web console and CLI) then presents this information to the administrator.

The user interface (web console and CLI) then presents the updates as "recommended" and "supported but not recommended" respectively to the administrator.

Reviewer 2: I'd argue against trying to be precise here, this is a descriptive doc, not an instruction doc. Being slightly vague helps skim over minor UI changes (lets say we change the wording)

Reviewer 5: Agree, being general and vague sounds good to me :)

> The update recommendation contains a link to further resources about the risk so that the administrator can make an informed decision about the update.

Reviewer 5: > The update recommendation contains a link

The "supported but not recommended" update recommendation contains a link ...

Reviewer 4: "not recommended update recommendation" :smile:

You can inspect all available updates with the following command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc adm upgrade --include-not-recommended
----

> The additional `--include-not-recommended` parameter includes updates that are available but not recommended due to a known risk that applies to the cluster.

Reviewer 2: not recommended clsuter is still supported, but I do not think we should make support statements in this kind of documentation

> The additional `--include-not-recommended` parameter includes updates that are available but not recommended due to a known risk that applies to the cluster.

Reviewer 2: and I do not think the stored override is worth including, its IMO not relevant

> The additional `--include-not-recommended` parameter includes updates that are available but not recommended due to a known risk that applies to the cluster.

Reviewer 4: I'm fine with either way

> The additional `--include-not-recommended` parameter includes updates that are available but not recommended due to a known risk that applies to the cluster.

Reviewer 5: @evakhoni update to a "not recommended' version is supported if the cluster administrator has evaluated the risks we present and decided to proceed with the version.

Recommended updates:

  VERSION     IMAGE
  4.10.26     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:e1fa1f513068082d97d78be643c369398b0e6820afab708d26acda2262940954
  4.10.25     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:ed84fb3fbe026b3bbb4a2637ddd874452ac49c6ead1e15675f257e28664879cc
  4.10.24     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:aab51636460b5a9757b736a29bc92ada6e6e6282e46b06e6fd483063d590d62a
  4.10.23     quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:e40e49d722cb36a95fa1c03002942b967ccbd7d68de10e003f0baa69abad457b

Supported but not recommended updates:

  Version: 4.11.0
  Image: quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release@sha256:300bce8246cf880e792e106607925de0a404484637627edf5f517375517d54a4
  Recommended: False
  Reason: RPMOSTreeTimeout
  Message: Nodes with substantial numbers of containers and CPU contention may not reconcile machine configuration https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2111817#c22
----

You can inspect the underlying availability data created by the CVO by querying the `ClusterVersion` resource:

[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get clusterversion version -o jsonpath='{.status}' | jq .availableUpdates

Reviewer 5: If I remember correctly, it's not recommended to use the external jq. 

To view all the updates, we also need to select conditionalUpdates

# oc get clusterversion version -o jsonpath='{.status.availableUpdates}{.status.conditionalUpdates}'

> $ oc get clusterversion version -o jsonpath='{.status}' | jq .availableUpdates

Reviewer 4: > it's not recommended to use the external jq.

mostly correct. the only thing is jsonpath alone will output an unformatted json in one line.. not really human readable (while I do agree we better not hardcode an external prerequisite unless strictly necessary)  
that btw why jokes aside I do entertain an 'yamlpath' of some sort.. it'll be both readable by itself, as well as fully standalone, and also symmetrical to the json counterpart. an RFC, wdyt?

> To view all the updates, we also need to select conditionalUpdates

good catch!
